## Analysis of Singapore Government’s TraceTogether application employing SOAP concepts

*A group of researchers from disciplines across the ANU have collaborated on a high level draft framework for evaluating various contact tracing technologies. Its aim is to make explicit factors that are relevant to the design and deployment of any technology implementation, and to surface relationships between these factors. It is styled around the acronym SOAP (the whitepaper is available here). It takes into account: the extent to which an implementation is secure from malicious or inadvertent misuse; how suitable it is for operational use as part of a health authority’s response to an outbreak; the extent to which assurance of that technology - validating that it is working as intended - is possible; and the extent to which it preserves individual and community privacy.*

*What follows is a short analysis of the Singapore Government’s TraceTogether app employing SOAP concepts. Working through this analysis helps to formalise criteria that could be part of an explicit evaluation method. The analysis is based on accessible information from the Web. It is current as of 27 April 2020*

## What is TraceTogether?

The Singapore Government deployed [TraceTogether](https://tracetogether.zendesk.com/hc/en-sg/articles/360043543473-How-does-TraceTogether-work-) to support existing COVID19 tracing processes in late March 2020. It is intended to help public health authorities get in phone contact with people who have come into contact with an infected person faster, where they are users of the TraceTogether app. It supplements existing contact tracing processes. It is not intended to automate the process of contact tracing. 

Users of the app exchange Bluetooth signals with each other when in prolonged physical proximity. Data about devices in proximity remains on a user’s device unless that user tests positive for COVID-19. If a user tests positive, they have the option to grant the Ministry of Health access to their TraceTogether data. The Ministry of Health uses this information to contact by phone any TraceTogether users who have been in proximity to that infected person, according to specific criteria. Their goal is to make the process of reaching out by phone to people who have been in proximity to an infected person faster. 

## Security

*SOAP considers the confidentiality, integrity and availability of contact tracing systems. It examines both technical vulnerabilities, and vulnerabilities a system may have to fraud, misuse and abuse.*

TraceTogether provides a range of information about data collected through the app and ways in which it is [used on their website](https://tracetogether.zendesk.com/hc/en-sg/articles/360043543473-How-does-TraceTogether-work-). Bluetooth data is stored [locally on a user’s phone](https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf) in an encrypted form. A number of researchers in Australia have provided detailed reflections on security-related aspects of TraceTogether, including [Dr. Hassan Asghar and colleagues](https://eng.unimelb.edu.au/ingenium/research-stories/world-class-research/real-world-impact/on-the-privacy-of-tracetogether,-the-singaporean-covid-19-contact-tracing-mobile-app,-and-recommendations-for-australia) and [Dr. Vanessa Teague](https://github.com/vteague/contactTracing/blob/master/blog/2020-03-30TweakingTracetogether.md). TraceTogether generates temporary user IDs and refreshes these frequently. Their BlueTrace protocol White Paper recommends that any solutions adopting this approach refresh user IDs every 15 minutes, mitigating the effects of replay attacks. These IDs, called TempIDs, are generated by the server (administered by the Singapore government), and generated by encrypting a user’s real ID, time stamps and a random seed, with a secret key known only to the authority. Each tempID appears random because of the random seed included in the encryption process. The generation of these temporary IDs, and that data logs on the user’s phone, ensure that the identity of other device users remains private from that user, and in the event a user’s device is hacked, that any data on it is unintelligible. 

Several researchers have noted that these actions do not mask the Singapore government from knowing the identity of TraceTogether users, as they are able to decrypt data logs and match these to the real identities of app users. The Singapore government has [noted](https://blog.gds-gov.tech/automated-contact-tracing-is-not-a-coronavirus-panacea-57fb3ce61d98) that this is necessary to facilitate the process of contact tracing: namely, providing a phone number and name for human contact tracers to get in touch with. 

TraceTogether do not disclose information publicly about whether security and risk assessments have been conducted, and standard processes for documenting system requirements, and identifying and responding to cyber risks, implemented. This does not mean security assessments haven’t been conducted, simply that they are not accessible on the open Web. The BlueTrace White Paper provides an overview of security requirements and tradeoffs they [considered](https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf).

In a general sense, TraceTogether mitigates some broader fraud and misuse risks through the Ministry of Health’s role in initiating and receiving user BlueTooth data. Individuals cannot falsify their COVID status through the application itself, because it does not rely on users reporting or otherwise broadcasting their infection status. Bluetooth IDs are only shared with the Ministry of Health in the event a person is confirmed to have COVID19 (via existing testing processes), who happens to have downloaded and installed TraceTogether. Developers of [TraceTogether have noted](https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf) that this human-in-the-loop approach helps to verify false negatives and false positives generated by the app, supplementing it with existing contact tracing methods.

## Operational Use

*SOAP considers the extent to which a contact tracing technology practically supports and improves existing contact tracing processes, whether it is straightforward for citizens to engage with and whether contact tracing experts have been involved in its design.*

TraceTogether developers [note that the app was created in](https://blog.gds-gov.tech/automated-contact-tracing-is-not-a-coronavirus-panacea-57fb3ce61d98) collaboration with public health authorities, to support existing contact tracing processes. It is used to make the process of connecting with contacts who have been in prolonged proximity to infected persons faster. It has been downloaded by approximately 16% of Singaporeans as of 24 April 2020. The number of users who have downloaded the app and continue to use it is unclear. 

TraceTogether has been criticised for its usability and reliability as an app storing Bluetooth IDs in proximity. As of 20 April, TraceTogether has a score of 3.2 on the Apple App Store, of 132 ratings. A number of user reviews note issues of inconvenience, with the app needing to be open at all times on the user’s screen on Apple devices to function. When other apps are open, or phone calls are in progress, TraceTogether will not register IDs in proximity. This is a limitation of Apple’s iOS. Users are recommended to use TraceTogether’s Power Saver Mode when in meetings and in crowded places. These practical issues make it hard to rely on IDs generated by TraceTogether as a reasonable reflection of TraceTogether users a user who tests positive for COVID19 may have come into contact with. 

The TraceTogether team have frankly acknowledged these limitations, and emphasised the need for existing contact tracing solutions to supplement TraceTogether. They are quick to respond to user reviews on Apple and Android app stores, with detailed guidance for users. 
The TraceTogether website provides a range of information about making best use of the app.

At present, TraceTogether has not hit a sufficient threshold of users to support more meaningful reliance on the app as part of contact tracing. 

Because TraceTogether is designed to supplement existing contact tracing processes, it does not e.g. exclude certain populations from the contact tracing processes altogether. IDs supplement follow up phone interviews with that infected person. From that person, information about their location, recent movements and encounters are gathered to support contact tracing. As such, any people in proximity to an infected person who do not have TraceTogether installed, or have a device full stop, may still be identified and alerted using existing processes.

It is unclear from publicly available information how practitioners undertaking contact tracing have experienced TraceTogether, and in what circumstances they have used TraceTogether to support contact tracing.

## Assurance

*SOAP suggests that assurance mechanisms for organisations deploying an application to ensure it is working as intended, and can be interrogated and validated by independent parties, are an important part of evaluating the success of any contact tracing technology.*

The BlueTrace protocol and OpenTrace reference implementation underpinning TraceTogether have been published [here](https://tracetogether.zendesk.com/hc/en-sg/articles/360044883814-BlueTrace-Manifesto). TraceTogether also maintains [App Release Notes](https://tracetogether.zendesk.com/hc/en-sg/articles/360044883814-BlueTrace-Manifesto) with information about updates and patches. The developer team has been active in maintaining and responding to user reviews on Apple and Google App Stores. 

It is not clear what processes exist for monitoring and evaluating the performance of TraceTogether, from publicly available sources. TraceTogether have stated an intention to [disable TraceTogether’s functionality](https://tracetogether.zendesk.com/hc/en-sg/articles/360044883814-BlueTrace-Manifesto) once contact tracing (presumably of COVID19) ceases. Oversight of the commitment to disable TraceTogether functionality, and delete user data on request, is not clear.

It would be great to see publicly available metrics of usage of TraceTogether, for contact tracing. 

These metrics could outline:
* The number of confirmed cases of COVID19 where that confirmed case had downloaded TraceTogether
* The number of occasions on which TraceTogether data has facilitated contact tracing
* Measures of uptake of TraceTogether by phone make 

## Privacy

*SOAP requires that data collected via a contact tracing app be proportionate to its purpose, and exercise a range of privacy safeguards.*

Downloading of TraceTogether in Singapore is voluntary. Consent is sought from users downloading the app to exchange Bluetooth signals with nearby phones running the same app.

Consent screens and privacy FAQs on the TraceTogether website are simple and clear. TraceTogether stores only the following identity information: a user’s mobile number and a random UserID. Bluetooth IDs exchanged are stored on a user’s device. If they test positive for COVID19, they consent to provide the Ministry of Health with the data stored on that device by the app. This information is added to information - location, demographic details, identities of contacts - collected by health officials from the user of the app during phone interviews. 

Users can delete the app at any time. The Ministry of Health states that data will only be used for contact tracing in COVID-19. No processes for deleting data already provided during contact tracing are stated. Users can revoke consent to have their device registered as in proximity to another device by emailing the TraceTogether team with the mobile they registered in the app. The TraceTogether Team state that that mobile number and User ID will be deleted from the server. Mechanisms for users to verify that in fact, data provided by users is only being used for contact tracing, and that mobile numbers and User IDs are deleted on request, are not stated. 

TraceTogether is known as a centralised Bluetooth solution, because the Ministry of Health controls ID generation and close contact notification. They are able to link together two random IDs, or link a random ID to a registered identity (phone numbers in this case). This is an intended feature, to facilitate contact with people with devices in proximity to the infected person.  Some common technical privacy risks have been identified with Bluetooth based centralised solutions like TraceTogether. For a comprehensive overview of risks associated with malicious or unintended reidentification of eIDs, other than by authorities to whom consent has been granted, read [DP-3T’s white paper](https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/blob/master/DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf).

One common linkability issue was identified as part of the Security section of this analysis. A privacy measure adopted in Bluetooth firmware in smartphones introduces rotating random addresses that are unlinkable by external observers, to prevent malicious actors from tracking users via their Bluetooth addresses. The introduction of additional identifiers for bluetooth services (via ephemeral IDs) can potentially compromise this privacy measure if they are not implemented correctly. 

Depending on the lifetime of the IDs and the lifetime of the random bluetooth addresses, different IDs can be linked together by a third party other than the health authority. In their [BlueTrace Protocol White Paper](https://bluetrace.io/static/bluetrace_whitepaper-938063656596c104632def383eb33b3c.pdf), it seems that the lifetime of an eID is programmable, and the recommended lifetime for an eID is 15 minutes. From the observation done by Becker et al [https://doi.org/10.2478/popets-2019-0036](https://doi.org/10.2478/popets-2019-0036)  , iOS, for example, rotates the random bluetooth addresses with varying lifetimes (ranging from seconds to 2 hours), but with an average lifetime of 20 minutes. This would allow a passive observer to link two eIDs if the rotation of the eIDs and bluetooth addresses overlaps.  A good implementation should synchronise the changes in ephemeral IDs with the Bluetooth addresses. 
 
Privacy protection for users (against other users or service providers) is enforced through encryption. Assuming the lifetime of eIDs are set up to be synchronised with the lifetime of random bluetooth addresses, this will provide good protection of user's privacy against all but the health authority.  

